Capitalism
Capitalism, when viewed as a system of exchange relations, is described as a commodity or market society in which everything, including one's labor power, has a price and all transactions are fundamentally exchange transactions. Capitalism, when viewed as a system of power relations, is described as a society in which every kind of transactional relation is fundamentally exploitative.  (Tong, Rosemarie.  Feminist Thought:  A More Comprehensive Introduction, 1998, p. 96.)

Capitalism is, was and always will be essentially and fundamentally a patriarchy.  Iris Young wrote:  "My thesis is  that marginalization of women and thereby our functioning as a secondary labor force is an essential and fundamental characteristic of capitalism."  (Tong, Rosemarie.  Feminist Thought:  A More Comprehensive Introduction, 1998, p. 122-123.)

Capitalism is a system that depends on the exploitation of underclass groups for its survival.  (hooks, bell.  Feminist Theory:  from margin to center, 1984, p. 101.)

Capitalism is an ideology that has for its dominant values, "individualism, competitiveness, domination and in our time, consumption of a particular kind."   (Hartman, Heidi,  "The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism." from The Second Wave edited by Linda Nicholson, 1997, p. 99.)

"The first mode of economy with the weapon of propaganda, a mode which tends to engulf the entire globe and stamp out all other economies, tolerating no rival at its side.  Yet at the same time it is also the first mode of economy which is unable to exist by itself, which needs other economic systems as a medium and a soil."  (Rosa Luxemburg 1963).
"An advanced stage of patriarchy." (Azizah Al-Hibri 1981).   (Both these quotes are from Chris Kramarae & Paula A. Treichler. Amazons, Bluestockings, and Crones, Pandora Press, 1992, p. 85.)

Capitalism:  The economic system in which the means of production are in private ownership.  Marx described the exploitative forms of capitalism in his theory of the capitalist mode of production.  Radical feminists, liberals and socialist feminists agree that there can be no understanding of the nature of contemporary capitalist society without placing the oppression of women at the centre of such an analysis.  Nor can any adequate feminist theory simply add women as a "missing ingredient" to an overall Marxist theory.  (Humm, Maggie.  The Dictionary of Feminist Theory, 1990,  p. 23.)

Capitalism:  An economic system characterized by private or corporate ownership of capital goods and by prices, production and distribution of goods that are determined mainly by competition in a free market.  (The Merriam-Webster Dictionary, 1997, p. 122.) 
14-16, 146-52, 154-6
[[Category:Terms]]
[[Category:Concepts]]
[[Category:Politics]]