Daniel Lagache (1903-1972) is one psychiatre and psychanalyste French. Allowed ==Biographie== with higher Teacher training school in 1924, at the same time as Raymond Aron, Paul Nizan and Jean-Paul Sartre, Daniel Lagache is received brilliantly with agregation from philosophy. Interested by psychopathology, it starts, on the councils of its Master G. Dumas, of the studies of medicine then of psychiatry and becomes chief of clinical near H. Claude. Named lecturer in psychology at the university of Strasbourg in 1937, it succeeds P. Guillaume in the pulpit of psychology of Sorbonne in 1947, then with G. Poyer in that of pathological psychology in 1955. It takes part with Jacques Lacan in the foundation of French Company of psychoanalysis in 1953 and, ten years later, in that of the psychoanalytical Association of France, of which he is the first president. In its teaching, Lagache approaches the various fields of psychology, showing constantly concerned synthesis there, in the spirit of its remarkable inaugural lesson on  the Unit of psychology: experimental psychology and clinic psychology  (1949). But its work is primarily psychopathological. Initially of phenomenologic inspiration, it largely uses the designs of Karl Jaspers, in particular in  the verbal Hallucinations and the word  (thesis of medicine, 1934) and in  the Jealousy in love  (thesis of letters, 2 flight., 1947). After having made a didactic psychoanalysis with Rudolph Loewenstein, Lagache directs its research from the point of view freudienne and becomes, for this reason, one of the most outstanding personalities of the French psychoanalytical movement. Its small work  the Psychoanalysis  (1955) is “ a model of exactitude in the concepts and an example of opening as for diversity of the fields of application ” (Didier Anzieu). Its reports/ratios, published in the review  the Psychoanalysis , on “the Transfer” in the psychoanalytical cure (1952), on “Psychoanalysis and structure of the personality” (1961), on “Imagination, reality, truth” (1963), as well as very many other articles and communications, testify to its clinical experiment and its research deepened in psychoanalysis. Founder and director of a collection entitled  Bibliothèque of psychoanalysis and clinic psychology , Daniel Lagache was the organizer of the project of the  Vocabulaire of the psychoanalysis  (1967), written under its direction by Jean Laplanche and Jean-Bertrand Pontalis. It also sought to introduce the designs freudiennes into the social psychology, for which it created a laboratory in the Sorbonne, and in criminology; it devoted several studies to the criminogenèse. Its influence remains large on psychopathology and the psychoanalysis contemporary Frenchwomen, especially in the university world.