Imaginary, Symbolic, Real (imaginaire, symbolique, réel)
Of these three terms, the 'imaginary' was the first to appear, well before the Rome Report of  1953.
At the time, Lacan regarded the 'imago' as the proper study of psychology and identification as the fundamental psychical process.
The imaginary was then the world, the register, the dimension of images, conscious or unconscious, perceived or imagined.
In this respect, 'imaginary' is not simply the opposite of 'real': the image certainly belongs to reality and Lacan sought in animal ethology facts that brought out formative effects comparable to that described in 'the mirror stage.'

The notion of the 'symbolic' came to the forefront in the Rome Report. The symbols referred to here are not icons, stylized figurations, but signifiers, in the sense developed by Saussure and Jakobson, extended into a generalized definition: differential elements, in themselves without meaning, which acquire value only in their mutual relations, and forming a closed order - the question is whether this order is or is not complete.
Henceforth it is the symbolic, not the imaginary, that is seen to be the determining order of the subject, and its effects are radical: the subject, in Lacan's sense, is himself an effect of the symbolic.
Levi-Strauss's formalization of the elementary structures of kinship and its use of Jakobson's binarism provided the basis for Lacan's conception of the symbolic - a conception, however, that goes well beyond its origins.
According to Lacan, a distinction must be drawn between what belongs to the imaginary.
In particular, the relation between the subject, on the one hand, and the signifiers, speech, language, on the other, is frequently contrasted with the imaginary relation, that between the ego and its images.
In each case, many problems derive from the relations between these two dimensions.

The 'real' emerges as a third term, linked to the symbolic and the imaginary: it stands for what is neither symbolic nor imaginary, and remains foreclosed from the analytic experience, which is an experience of speech.
What is prior to the assumption of the symbolic, the real in its 'raw' state (in the case of the subject, for instance, the organism and its biological needs), may only be supposed, it is an algebraic x.
The Lacanian concept of the 'real' is not to be confused with reality, which is perfectly knowable: the subject of desire knows now more than that, since for it reality is entirely phantasmatic.

The term 'real', which was at first of only minor importance, acting as a kind of safety rail, has gradually been developed, and its signification has been considerably altered.
It began, naturally enough, by presenting, in relation to symbolic substitutions and imaginary variations, a function of constancy: 'the real is that which always returns to the same place.'  
It then became that before which the imaginary faltered, that over which the symbolic stumbles, that which is refractory, resistant.
Hence the formula: "the real is the impossible."
It is in this sense that the term begins to appear regularly, as an adjective, to describe that which is lacking in the symblic order, the ineliminable residue of all articulation, the foreclosed element, which may be approached but never grasped: the umbilical cord of the symbolic.

As distinguished by Lacan, these three dimensions are, as we say, profoundly heterogenoeus. 
Yet the fact that the three terms have been linked together in a series raises the question as to what they have in common, a question to which Lacna has addressed himself in his most recent thinking on the subject of the Borromean knot.


[[Category:Terms]]
[[Category:Concepts]]
[[Category:Psychoanalysis]]
[[Category:Jacques Lacan]]