Patriarchy
A social system characterized by male domination and female subordination.  (Abramovitz, 
Mimi.  Regulating the Lives of Women, 1989, p. 25.) 

We define patriarchy as a set of social relations which has a material base and in which 
there are hierarchical relations between men and solidarity among them which enable them 
in turn to dominate women.  The material base of patriarchy is men's control over women's 
labor power. (Hartman, Heidi,  "The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism", from 
The Second Wave edited by Linda Nicholson, 1997, p. 103.) 

Kate Millet's definition of patriarchy:  "our society...is a patriarchy.  The fact is evident at 
once if one recalls that the military, industry, technology, universities, science, political 
offices, finances---in short, every avenue of power within the society, including the 
coercive force of the police, is entirely in male hands."  (Hartman, Heidi,  "The Unhappy 
Marriage of Marxism and Feminism", from The Second Wave edited by Linda Nicholson, 
1997, p. 101.) 

“male control of the public and private worlds constitutes patriarchy...” [Tong, Rosemary.
(1998).  Feminist Theory: A Comprehensive Introduction, p.49.]

“Patriarchal ideology, according to [Kate] Millet, exaggerates biological difference between men
and women, making sure that men always have the dominant, or masculine, roles and women
always have the subordinate, or feminine ones.  This ideology is so powerful that men are usually
able to secure the apparent consent of the very women they oppress.  They do this through
institutions such as the academy, the church, and the family...” [Tong, Rosemary (1998). 
Feminist Theory: A Comprehensive Introduction, p.49.]

“Male supremacist ideology encourages women to believe we are valueless and obtain value only
by relating to or bonding with men” [hooks, bell.  (1984).  Feminist Theory: From Margin to
Center, p.43.]

“Though patriarchy is hierarchical and men of different classes, races, or ethnic groups have
different places in the patriarchy, they also are united in their shared relationship of dominance
over their women... Patriarchy is not simply hierarchical organization, but hierarchy in which
particular people fill particular places.” [Heidi Hartmann (1979) in Kramarae, Cheris &
Treichler, Paula A., Amazons, Bluestockings, and Crones: A Feminist Dictionary.]